.TH GIT-AUTOCOMMIT 1 "July 2026" "git-autocommit 0.0.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
git-autocommit \- split staged changes into atomic Conventional Commits
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git autocommit
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br
.B git-autocommit
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git-autocommit
uses an OpenAI-compatible model to propose commit messages and group whole staged files into atomic Conventional Commits.
The proposed plan is validated before repository mutation: every staged path must appear exactly once, invented paths are rejected, and the generated commit chain must reproduce the captured staged tree.
.PP
The command captures
.B HEAD
and the staged tree before contacting the model. Before moving
.BR HEAD ,
it verifies that neither has changed. Generated commits are signed by default. Normal Git commit hooks are not run.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --base-url " URL"
Override the OpenAI-compatible API base URL.
.TP
.BI --model " MODEL"
Override the model name.
.TP
.BI --timeout " SECONDS"
Override the HTTP timeout. The value must be positive.
.TP
.BI --prompt-dir " PATH"
Load custom
.I system.md
and
.I plan.md
prompt files from another directory.
.TP
.B --single
Require exactly one commit containing every staged path.
.TP
.B --no-single
Disable single-commit mode configured through TOML or the environment.
.TP
.B --sign
Enable commit signing, overriding lower-precedence configuration.
.TP
.B --no-sign
Disable commit signing, overriding lower-precedence configuration.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Contact the model, validate the plan, and print it without creating commits or moving
.BR HEAD .
.TP
.B --show-prompt
Render prompts from staged content and exit without contacting the model.
.TP
.B --show-config
Print resolved configuration and exit before reading staged changes.
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Print help information.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Repository configuration is read from
.IR .git/autocommit.toml .
Precedence is command-line options, environment variables, repository configuration, then built-in defaults.
.PP
Supported TOML keys are
.BR base_url ,
.BR model ,
.BR timeout_seconds ,
.BR prompt_dir ,
.BR max_diff_bytes ,
.BR max_commits ,
.BR single_commit ,
and
.BR sign_commits .
.PP
Supported environment variables are
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_BASE_URL ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_MODEL ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_TIMEOUT ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_PROMPT_DIR ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_MAX_DIFF_BYTES ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_MAX_COMMITS ,
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_SINGLE_COMMIT ,
and
.BR GIT_AUTOCOMMIT_SIGN_COMMITS .
.PP
The legacy
.B DUBNIUM_LOCAL_LLM_BASE_URL
and
.B DUBNIUM_LOCAL_LLM_MODEL
variables are accepted as fallback aliases.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .git/autocommit.toml
Per-repository configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/git-autocommit/system.md
Default location for an optional custom system prompt.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/git-autocommit/plan.md
Default location for an optional custom plan prompt.
.SH SECURITY
Staged path names, diff statistics, and bounded staged diff content are sent to the configured model endpoint. Review that endpoint's transport, access, retention, and training policies before using it with sensitive repositories.
.PP
Normal commit hooks are intentionally not run. Run required formatting, tests, secret scanning, DCO checks, and other policy gates before invoking the command, or enforce them in CI.
.SH EXAMPLES
Preview a validated plan without changing the repository:
.PP
.nf
git add src/ tests/
git autocommit --dry-run
.fi
.PP
Create the planned commits without signing:
.PP
.nf
git autocommit --no-sign
.fi
.PP
Inspect resolved configuration:
.PP
.nf
git autocommit --show-config
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns zero on success and non-zero when configuration, model communication, plan validation, Git operations, signing, or concurrency checks fail.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR git-commit (1),
.BR git-add (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Ryan Jennings and contributors.
.SH LICENSE
Apache License 2.0.
